README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# fixedincome <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/fixedincome)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=fixedincome)
[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

Calculations involving interest rates are usually very easy and
straightforward, but sometimes it involves specific issues that makes
the task of writing structured and reproducible code for it chalenging
and annoying. The `fixedincome` package brings many functions to
strucutre and create facilities to handle with interest rates, term
structure of interest rates and specific issues regarding compounding
rates and day count rules, for example.

Below there are a few examples on how to create and make calculations
with interest rates using `fixedincome`.

## Installation

You can install from CRAN with:

``` r
install.packages("fixedincome")
```

You can install the development version of fixedincome from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("wilsonfreitas/R-fixedincome")
```

## Examples

To create an interest rate we need to specify 4 elements:

-   the value of the interest rate itself, a decimal number
-   the compounding regime of interest rate, that can be `simple`,
    `discrete` or `continuous`.
-   the day count rule which defines how interest is accrued over time,
    we have a few options, for example, `actual/360` where the days
    between two dates are calculated as the difference and the year is
    assumed to be 360 days.
-   the calendar used to count the number of days between two dates, we
    have `actual` calendar that compute the difference between two
    dates.

There is another important topic that wasn’t declared here that is the
*frequency* of interest. To start with the things simple `fixedincome`
handles only with *annual* rates since this represents the great
majority of rates used in financial market contracts, but this
restriction can be reviewed in the future.

Given that let’s declare an annual spot rate with a `simple`
compounding, an `actual/360` and the `actual` calendar.

``` r
library(fixedincome)
sr <- spotrate(0.06, "simple", "actual/360", "actual")
sr
#> [1] "0.06 simple actual/360 actual"
```

Compound the spot rate for 7 months.

``` r
compound(sr, 7, "months")
#> [1] 1.035
```

Also compound using dates.

``` r
compound(sr, as.Date("2022-02-23"), as.Date("2022-12-28"))
#> [1] 1.051333
```

Spot rates can be put inside data.frames.

``` r
library(dplyr)
library(fixedincome)

df <- tibble(
  rate = spotrate(rep(10.56 / 100, 5),
    compounding = "discrete",
    daycount = "business/252",
    calendar = "Brazil/ANBIMA"
  ),
  terms = term(1:5, "years")
)

df
#> # A tibble: 5 x 2
#>   rate                                       terms  
#>   <SpotRate>                                 <Term> 
#> 1 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 1 year 
#> 2 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 2 years
#> 3 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 3 years
#> 4 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 4 years
#> 5 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 5 years
```

The tidyverse verbs can be easily used with `SpotRate` and `Term`
classes.

``` r
df |> mutate(fact = compound(rate, terms))
#> # A tibble: 5 x 3
#>   rate                                       terms    fact
#>   <SpotRate>                                 <Term>  <dbl>
#> 1 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 1 year   1.11
#> 2 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 2 years  1.22
#> 3 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 3 years  1.35
#> 4 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 4 years  1.49
#> 5 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 5 years  1.65
```

### Spot rate curves

Let’s create a spot rate curve using web scraping (from B3 website)

``` r
source("examples/utils-functions.R")
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2022-02-23")
curve
#>          SpotRateCurve
#> 1 day           0.1065
#> 3 days          0.1064
#> 25 days         0.1111
#> 44 days         0.1138
#> 66 days         0.1168
#> 87 days         0.1189
#> 108 days        0.1207
#> 131 days        0.1220
#> 152 days        0.1227
#> 172 days        0.1235
#> # ... with 29 more rows
#> discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 
#> Reference date: 2022-02-23
```

`SpotRateCurve` plots can be easily done by calling `plot`.

``` r
plot(curve)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-10-1.png" width="100%" />

For another date.

``` r
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2011-02-23")
plot(curve)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-11-1.png" width="100%" />

It can show the forward rates for the short term by selecting the first
two years.

``` r
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2022-02-23")
plot(fixedincome::first(curve, "2 years"), show_forward = TRUE)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-12-1.png" width="100%" />

Once interpolation is set, it can be used in the plot.

``` r
curve_2y <- fixedincome::first(curve, "2 years")
interpolation(curve_2y) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(curve_2y, use_interpolation = TRUE, legend_location = "bottomright")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-13-1.png" width="100%" />

Parametric models like the Nelson-Siegel-Svensson model can be fitted to
the curve.

``` r
beta1 <- as.numeric(fixedincome::last(curve, "1 day"))
beta2 <- as.numeric(curve[1]) - beta1
interpolation(curve) <- fit_interpolation(
  interp_nelsonsiegelsvensson(beta1, beta2, 0.01, 0.01, 2, 1), curve
)

interpolation(curve)
#> <Interpolation: nelsonsiegelsvensson > 
#>  Parameters:
#>   beta1   beta2   beta3   beta4 lambda1 lambda2 
#>   0.119  -0.013   1.000  -0.975   1.195   1.122
```

Once set to the curve it is used in the plot to show daily forward
rates.

``` r
plot(curve, use_interpolation = TRUE, show_forward = TRUE, legend_location = "bottom")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-15-1.png" width="100%" />

The interpolation can be changed in order to compare different
interpolations and the effects in forward rates.

``` r
interpolation(curve) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(
  curve,
  use_interpolation = TRUE, show_forward = TRUE,
  legend_location = "bottomright"
)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-16-1.png" width="100%" />

Interpolation enables the creation of standardized curves, commonly used
in risk management to build risk factors.

``` r
risk_terms <- c(1, c(3, 6, 9) * 21, c(1, 5, 10) * 252)
risk_curve <- curve[[risk_terms]]
interpolation(risk_curve) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(risk_curve, use_interpolation = TRUE)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-17-1.png" width="100%" />

Commit message:

Added cran-check to github actions

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# fixedincome <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/fixedincome)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=fixedincome)
[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/wilsonfreitas/R-fixedincome/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/wilsonfreitas/R-fixedincome/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
<!-- badges: end -->

Calculations involving interest rates are usually very easy and
straightforward, but sometimes it involves specific issues that makes
the task of writing structured and reproducible code for it chalenging
and annoying. The `fixedincome` package brings many functions to
strucutre and create facilities to handle with interest rates, term
structure of interest rates and specific issues regarding compounding
rates and day count rules, for example.

Below there are a few examples on how to create and make calculations
with interest rates using `fixedincome`.

## Installation

You can install from CRAN with:

``` r
install.packages("fixedincome")
```

You can install the development version of fixedincome from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("wilsonfreitas/R-fixedincome")
```

## Examples

To create an interest rate we need to specify 4 elements:

-   the value of the interest rate itself, a decimal number
-   the compounding regime of interest rate, that can be `simple`,
    `discrete` or `continuous`.
-   the day count rule which defines how interest is accrued over time,
    we have a few options, for example, `actual/360` where the days
    between two dates are calculated as the difference and the year is
    assumed to be 360 days.
-   the calendar used to count the number of days between two dates, we
    have `actual` calendar that compute the difference between two
    dates.

There is another important topic that wasn’t declared here that is the
*frequency* of interest. To start with the things simple `fixedincome`
handles only with *annual* rates since this represents the great
majority of rates used in financial market contracts, but this
restriction can be reviewed in the future.

Given that let’s declare an annual spot rate with a `simple`
compounding, an `actual/360` and the `actual` calendar.

``` r
library(fixedincome)
sr <- spotrate(0.06, "simple", "actual/360", "actual")
sr
#> [1] "0.06 simple actual/360 actual"
```

Compound the spot rate for 7 months.

``` r
compound(sr, 7, "months")
#> [1] 1.035
```

Also compound using dates.

``` r
compound(sr, as.Date("2022-02-23"), as.Date("2022-12-28"))
#> [1] 1.051333
```

Spot rates can be put inside data.frames.

``` r
library(dplyr)
#> 
#> Attaching package: 'dplyr'
#> The following objects are masked from 'package:fixedincome':
#> 
#>     first, last
#> The following objects are masked from 'package:stats':
#> 
#>     filter, lag
#> The following objects are masked from 'package:base':
#> 
#>     intersect, setdiff, setequal, union
library(fixedincome)

df <- tibble(
  rate = spotrate(rep(10.56 / 100, 5),
    compounding = "discrete",
    daycount = "business/252",
    calendar = "Brazil/ANBIMA"
  ),
  terms = term(1:5, "years")
)

df
#> # A tibble: 5 x 2
#>   rate                                       terms  
#>   <SpotRate>                                 <Term> 
#> 1 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 1 year 
#> 2 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 2 years
#> 3 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 3 years
#> 4 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 4 years
#> 5 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 5 years
```

The tidyverse verbs can be easily used with `SpotRate` and `Term`
classes.

``` r
df |> mutate(fact = compound(rate, terms))
#> # A tibble: 5 x 3
#>   rate                                       terms    fact
#>   <SpotRate>                                 <Term>  <dbl>
#> 1 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 1 year   1.11
#> 2 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 2 years  1.22
#> 3 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 3 years  1.35
#> 4 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 4 years  1.49
#> 5 0.1056 discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 5 years  1.65
```

### Spot rate curves

Let’s create a spot rate curve using web scraping (from B3 website)

``` r
source("examples/utils-functions.R")
#> 
#> Attaching package: 'bizdays'
#> The following object is masked from 'package:stats':
#> 
#>     offset
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2022-02-23")
curve
#>          SpotRateCurve
#> 1 day           0.1065
#> 3 days          0.1064
#> 25 days         0.1111
#> 44 days         0.1138
#> 66 days         0.1168
#> 87 days         0.1189
#> 108 days        0.1207
#> 131 days        0.1220
#> 152 days        0.1227
#> 172 days        0.1235
#> # ... with 29 more rows
#> discrete business/252 Brazil/ANBIMA 
#> Reference date: 2022-02-23
```

`SpotRateCurve` plots can be easily done by calling `plot`.

``` r
plot(curve)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-10-1.png" width="100%" />

For another date.

``` r
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2011-02-23")
plot(curve)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-11-1.png" width="100%" />

It can show the forward rates for the short term by selecting the first
two years.

``` r
curve <- get_curve_from_web("2022-02-23")
plot(fixedincome::first(curve, "2 years"), show_forward = TRUE)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-12-1.png" width="100%" />

Once interpolation is set, it can be used in the plot.

``` r
curve_2y <- fixedincome::first(curve, "2 years")
interpolation(curve_2y) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(curve_2y, use_interpolation = TRUE, legend_location = "bottomright")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-13-1.png" width="100%" />

Parametric models like the Nelson-Siegel-Svensson model can be fitted to
the curve.

``` r
beta1 <- as.numeric(fixedincome::last(curve, "1 day"))
beta2 <- as.numeric(curve[1]) - beta1
interpolation(curve) <- fit_interpolation(
  interp_nelsonsiegelsvensson(beta1, beta2, 0.01, 0.01, 2, 1), curve
)

interpolation(curve)
#> <Interpolation: nelsonsiegelsvensson > 
#>  Parameters:
#>   beta1   beta2   beta3   beta4 lambda1 lambda2 
#>   0.119  -0.013   1.000  -0.975   1.195   1.122
```

Once set to the curve it is used in the plot to show daily forward
rates.

``` r
plot(curve, use_interpolation = TRUE, show_forward = TRUE, legend_location = "bottom")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-15-1.png" width="100%" />

The interpolation can be changed in order to compare different
interpolations and the effects in forward rates.

``` r
interpolation(curve) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(
  curve,
  use_interpolation = TRUE, show_forward = TRUE,
  legend_location = "bottomright"
)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-16-1.png" width="100%" />

Interpolation enables the creation of standardized curves, commonly used
in risk management to build risk factors.

``` r
risk_terms <- c(1, c(3, 6, 9) * 21, c(1, 5, 10) * 252)
risk_curve <- curve[[risk_terms]]
interpolation(risk_curve) <- interp_flatforward()
plot(risk_curve, use_interpolation = TRUE)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-17-1.png" width="100%" />
